so this paper came out mid last year at
2018 and as soon as I saw it I was like
I have to do with the sky videos on this
it's called the sausage globular
clusters
the sausage globular clusters about
eight of them that are classed as
sausage globular clusters four of them a
Messier objects and there was one that
we hadn't covered yet which is m75 it's
a globular cluster that was four hundred
thousand stars in there so it's pretty
big it's actually the densest globular
cluster we know because the majority of
stars are actually in that central
nucleus it's about 67 thousand light
years away or so and it's actually the
other side of the center of the galaxy
from us making it sort of of the
globular clusters in the Messier list
that are in the Milky Way it's the
furthest from us but I bet you are still
dying to find out why it's a sausage
globular cluster there was a paper that
came out in April of last year that was
looking at the positions and velocities
of stars in the Milky Way and they found
something that they dubbed the Gaia
sausage Gaia is a mission that is
basically trying to look at the
positions velocities and distances of
about a billion stars in the Milky Way
it's go look at some other stuff as well
but its main mission is stars in the
Milky Way because what it wants to do is
actually build sort of like a 3d map of
the Milky Way
what guy will do as well is actually
observe all these stars at like 70 times
each and then what you'll be able to do
is track their progress around the Milky
Way and like model what the parameters
are that describe their orbit around the
center of the Milky Way and so you then
can get this like 3d map of like a
billion stars in the Milky Way like
moving there's a lot of people that are
excited about Gaia data and they had
their first release last year this paper
that discovered the Gaia sausage was
last year it was by belikov and
collaborators and so one of the plots
that they made was this one which is
kind of messy what they've plotted here
is two different velocities of the stars
okay they've plotted the radial velocity
and what we call that azimuthal velocity
if we have a normal sort of coordinate
system that we're used to you know and
we see graphs in x position and y
position so this is like the center of
the Milky Way here 0 0 and you have a
star over here now in terms of the
center of the Milky Way doesn't really
make a lot of sense to use though
that coordinate system instead what we
use is spherical polar coordinates so
that star is it a radius R away from the
center of the galaxy and it's an angle
eater on its way around the galaxy so
say this zero is maybe like the line
from the Sun to the center of the Milky
Way then you can measure that around
from the Sun and so what they've
measured in this paper is the speed at
which the star is going around the
center of the galaxy so that would be
the velocity in the theta coordinate
that's your as a Musel velocity and
they've also measured the speed at which
it's changing in our directions that
would be your velocity in your are
dimension so basically you can think
that as like how fast you're going
around something but then how fast your
radius is changing to so what they've
plotted in this paper is that VR against
V of theta but they've plotted it in
lots of different panels because what
they've done is been their data in
metallicity which is how much like
percentage you have of the sort of
heavier elements as opposed to like your
hydrogen elements which kind of gives
you an age of the population as well
because think about it the very first
stars that will form or form from like
pure hydrogen and then they'll sort of
run out of fuel and they'll have runaway
fusion as they die and then go supernova
and throw those elements out and so the
next generation of stars or form at a
higher percentage of like oxygen
nitrogen like all the way up to iron and
so your higher metallicity then the
older your population tends to be and
then also they've plotted it in bins of
the height above the plane of the galaxy
so we've got in the plane of the galaxy
here and as you go down this way you've
got higher above that plane of the
galaxy and then you've got less metals
on this side and then the more you go
across you get to the more metal-rich
stars so older stars basically so the
thing what they found a sausage in is
the plots on this most right hand side
in the higher metallicity stars so you
can see in this top panel you've got two
very distinct populations okay one with
a lot more stars in so that's why it's a
lot darker in the plot and one with a
lot less stars in this one is the sort
of normal galaxy disk great because on
your x
is there you've got the velocity in the
our direction which if you think about
stars going around the center of a
galaxy you don't expect that to change
that much you expect them to say at the
same radius and just go around the
center of the galaxy with a speed that
is like a big speed in your as a move of
direction your theta velocity then
you've got the sausage this is the
sausage we see this sort of sausage
shape here and that's where you've
actually got barely any velocity really
in that azimuthal direction but then
you've got a massive difference in sort
of minus 400 to plus 400 in your radius
direction so if these stars in the
sausage they're not orbiting like normal
stars like we'd expect like just around
the centre of the galaxy in fact their
Bell they'd barely have any velocity
around the galaxy but they have a huge
velocity in your R direction so they're
sort of doing this the fact that they
weren't orbiting like normal suggests
that those stars didn't actually form in
the Galaxy itself is something we call
in set to star formation in the galaxy
and exit to star formation where stars
are formed outside of the galaxy and
have come in in some sort of merger with
the Milky Way so like another smaller
galaxy has come in and all of its stars
have been sort of flung at the center
and the gravitational forces in that
I've set them on these crazy orbits
where they're just changing their radius
all the time which is kind of cool right
what you really want to know though is
like when that merger happened and like
what the kind of stars you know how old
the stars were and how methyl rich what
kind of stars came into the galaxy when
that happened right and the best way to
do that is to look for globular clusters
so hence why they went on a search for
sausage globular clusters the reason
that globular clusters are so good like
this probe of like the age and so of
origin of the stars in a galaxy is
because you can really easily tell how
old the whole population of stars is
because they all formed at the same time
so if they all formed at the same time
your hottest and youngest stars will die
off this so your biggest stars or die
off first and you'll be left with the
much longer lived smaller stars so if
you look for the most massive thing in
the cluster then you'll be able to age
your cluster because basically
everything there was bigger than that
will have already died off and we know
the lifetimes of those stars quite well
until we can put an age on the cluster
to say it formed the
long ago so that's what they did in the
sausage Bobby the Custer paper which is
like my favorite but at the minute they
looked at 91 Milky Way copy the clusters
basically what they were doing is
looking at the properties of these
globular clusters in that velocity space
again and seeing if they were good
candidates for being a part of the
sausage basically in the gaya data so
here's all 91 and this time they're also
plotting in another panel the velocity
in the Phi direction this height above
the plane and so they've plotted it and
they've shown the area of the sausage
that they found in that previous paper
in all sort of three plots and basically
they've said is that these eight gobble
clusters that they've drawn circles
around the red ones of the circles
around these are all the ones that lie
within the sausage in all three of those
plots and so they're really good
candidates to be globular clusters as
part of the sausage so then with these
globular clusters they looked at the age
and metallicity to see whether they had
different properties to the ones that we
see in the Milky Way or where similar to
other clusters that we've seen that we
know have been accreted in merger events
into the Milky Way so here's the plot of
age against metallicity for these
globular clusters here is age of the
universe and you see that saying bigger
years which is billions of years pretty
cool and then we have math listing here
this is your f e over H this is your
iron to hydrogen ratio and basically you
have low metallicity down here and high
metallicity up here right and then this
is sort of young gobbler clusters and
this is old globular clusters basically
so most Milky Way gobble clusters lie on
this sort of track here quite old all
different ethnicities because in the
Milky Way
you've kind of got mixing of lots of gas
and stars so you don't tend to end up
with regions and very distinct
metallicity because you're sort of
always mixing stuff around so you get
bubble clusters forming all sorts of
different ethnicities at all sorts of
different ages but in a smaller galaxy
when I can morph galaxies we call them
you don't get as much mixing because
there's not as much rotation like
ordered rotation so like in the Milky
Way so we know from a previous merger
that's happened in the Milky Way that
there is a group of gobble clusters that
run along this track here which is from
a merger where the Sagittarius dwarf
galaxies and you'll see that the
globular clusters that they found in the
sausage again
and circled they also follow that
similar track but they're slightly
offset according to these authors so you
can tell they've come from a different
source like a different dwarf galaxy
that's merged with the Milky Way so
without these globular clusters like we
wouldn't have been able to do this so
the globular clusters basically give
away the sausages origin so you get the
date here and you might do more than one
sweep in an evening usually three or
four at least and you can see here he
begins
I saw Venus with a new ten-foot
reflector so he's changed telescopes at
this point variations and density you've
got means you're getting variations and
pressure that is sound that is sand so
there is stuff moving stuff moving yes
yeah yeah